[nexus] Implement on-boot DB Schema Migration (#3760)
oxidecomputer/omicron: schema/crdb/README.adoc

:showtitle:
:numbered:

= Database Schemas

This directory describes the schema(s) used by CockroachDB.

We use the following conventions:

> * `schema/crdb/VERSION/up.sql`: The necessary idempotent migrations to transition from the

Author: We will need to do this for any change to dbinit.sql -- fortunately, there are automated tests which fail if someone changes dbinit.sql without adding the necessary version directory.

"When do we need to add a version vs use an existing version directory" - I think this is entirely dependent on our release schedules? Like, if we wanted to bundle multiple changes together, we could, but also incrementing a minor version for each one doesn't seem atrocious, as long as we can perform the updates quickly.

  previous version of CockroachDB to this version.
* `schema/crdb/VERSION/down.sql`: The necessary idempotent migrations to transition from
  the current version of CockroachDB to the immediately preceding version.
* `schema/crdb/dbinit.sql`: The necessary operations to create the latest version

>   of the schema. Should be equivalent to running all `up.sql` migrations, in-order.

Reviewer: do we test that?

Author: We do, in `nexus/tests/integration_tests/schema.rs`.

- We rely on the `information_schema` virtual table in CockroachDB, and query for the state of tables, indices, columns, views, etc.
- We compare the version of the DB populated via `dbinit.sql` and the version of the DB populated via "all the up.sql files, in-order".
- We try to show a pretty diff if they're divergent, and we fail the test.

* `schema/crdb/dbwipe.sql`: The necessary operations to delete the latest version
  of the schema.

== Offline Upgrade

Nexus currently supports **offline** schema migrations.
This means we're operating with the following constraints:

* We assume that downtime is acceptable to perform an update.
* We assume that while an update is occuring, all Nexus services
are running the same version of software.
* We assume that no (non-upgrade) concurrent database requests will happen for
the duration of the migration.

This is not an acceptable long-term solution - we must be able to update

> without downtime - but it is a short-term solution, and one which provides a
> fall-back pathway for performing upgrades without data loss.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
without downtime - but it is an interim solution, and one which provides a
fall-back pathway for performing upgrades.
```

quiet part loud

> fall-back pathway for performing upgrades without data loss.

Author: Fixed

See RFD 319 for more discussion of the online upgrade plans.

=== How to perform an offline upgrade

Assumptions:

* The (previously) latest schema version is referred to as `OLD_VERSION`
* Your new changes will bring the schema to a new version, `NEW_VERSION`

Process:

* Add a file to `schema/crdb/NEW_VERSION/up.sql` with your changes to the schema.

> * Add a file to `schema/crdb/OLD_VERSION/down.sql` with the changes to undo your

Reviewer: does this imply that to get from A -> B we'd migrate A -> B -> C? If that's the case would it be worth stating explicitly?

Author: I'm assuming you mean "A -> C" would involve "A -> B -> C", and that's correct. Skipping versions would be disallowed. I'll add a note.

:showtitle:
:numbered:

= Database Schemas

> This directory describes the schema(s) used by CockroachDB.

Author: If it helps, Nexus has an "EXPECTED_SCHEMA" constant, and will refuse to boot unless this is set. This constant is also set within `dbinit.sql`. So I would expect that, as you say, the merge conflict would appear, and whoever edits the merge conflict would decide "what is the latest version that should be known to Nexus". As a policy, we should only be "moving forward" here.

I can certainly start by bumping the major number only, until we codify what compatibility between multiple versions means more clearly.

We use the following conventions:

* `schema/crdb/VERSION/up.sql`: The necessary idempotent migrations to transition from the
  previous version of CockroachDB to this version.

> * `schema/crdb/VERSION/down.sql`: The necessary idempotent migrations to transition from

Author: Sure thing, I'll remove `down.sql` and the corresponding docs. This was a "nice-to-have", but it's true, the feature was not being used.

* `schema/crdb/dbinit.sql`: The necessary operations to create the latest version
  of the schema. Should be equivalent to running all `up.sql` migrations, in-order.
* `schema/crdb/dbwipe.sql`: The necessary operations to delete the latest version
  of the schema.

Note that to upgrade from version N to version N+2, we always need to apply the
N+1 upgrade first, before applying the N+2 upgrade. This simplifies our model
of DB schema changes as an incremental linear history.

== Offline Upgrade

Nexus currently supports **offline** schema migrations.
This means we're operating with the following constraints:

* We assume that downtime is acceptable to perform an update.
* We assume that while an update is occuring, all Nexus services
are running the same version of software.
* We assume that no (non-upgrade) concurrent database requests will happen for
the duration of the migration.

This is not an acceptable long-term solution - we must be able to update
without downtime - but it is an interim solution, and one which provides a
fall-back pathway for performing upgrades.

See RFD 319 for more discussion of the online upgrade plans.

> === How to perform an offline upgrade

Author: Updated
